MBIO630_ProjectProposal
================
Kyleigh Kuball
2022-09-28

## Idea 1: Pig trails

Pigs can leave big scars and trails that might be able to be tracked by
satellite imagery. I would be curious in comparing the effectiveness of
the fences at containing the damage caused by the pigs on the Oahu
landscape. I would likely need substantial ground truthing to confirm
pig trails compared to hiker trails, car tracks, etc. and the place of
study would be a factor in the feasibility of this comparison. An area
with high traffic beyond the pigs would likely complicate the study
rapidly and create a greater need for ground truthing. However,
satellite imagery could be used to identify the presence of pigs in more
remote areas of the island that would be used for the control for the
fences, and this would be a benefit to using satellite imagery if it is
more difficult for people to access. Beyond using an satellite imagery
program, likely Planet since high resolution would be a must for this
project, pictures on the ground and locating pig trails seen from
satellite would be important. This means people and cameras would also
be needed.

## Idea 2: Surfing influx

With covid and the stay at home order affecting the Oahu, more people
were actually out in the water surfing since there wasn’t much else to
do and people were not allowed to stay on the beach unless they were in
the water doing an activity. Counting people in the water and the
changes from before, during, and after covid on the surf breaks would be
an interesting project. My question for this would be if there was a
significant difference in the number of people in the water at these
different time points. I would likely analyse the years 2018/2019, 2020,
and 2021/2022. I suspect the difference in surfers to be significant and
this would be important for the effects of people on the coral reefs. I
see a lot of surfers standing on the coral, bringing in a lot of
pollutants, or causing damage to the reef by scraping it with their
boards. Since boards are large and bright, I suspect only an average
imagery program would need to be used, such as Google Earth. The
difficult part would be identifying those with shortboards or more
neutral tones. I will need to find a balance in resolution if I continue
with this project.

## Idea 3: Covid reef changes

Similar to the idea of the surfers increasing with covid hitting Oahu,
the reef around Oahu was likely to change since some spots no longer had
as many people around (e.g. Haunama Bay), and others saw a great influx
of people in the water (e.g. Ala Moana area)during this time. I would
like to answer the questions of how certain reefs around the island may
have changed with the arrival of covid and the stay at home order. I
would use a high resolution imagery program like Planet Explorer and
compare areas of reef similar to how we studied the patch reef in
Kāneʻohe Bay. I would find how the area of the reefs changed from
Haunama Bay, Ala Moana area, Electrics, and Sharks Cove. Ideally I would
try and have some ground truthing to confirm the areas that I would be
studying with the satellite imagery. I would use gps and transect likely
similar to how we conducted the study on the patch reefs.
